Id: 489043
Title: Easy vs. probable or how to make money with software
Tags: programming,business
Date: 2011-05-14T17:15:17-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
It it hard to make \$1000 a month?
----------------------------------

There’s a question on Quora: [Is it hard to build, market and maintain a
web app that makes at least \$1000 a
month?](http://www.quora.com/Is-it-hard-to-build-market-and-maintain-a-web-app-that-makes-at-least-1000-a-month)

Most of the answers are happily saying “no, it’s not hard at all”,
usually justifying it with wishful thinking (“it’s not hard to get 50
people pay you \$20 a month”).

Those answers are misleading.

I don’t blame the respondents. They answered the question the way it was
asked.

What you ask vs. what you want to know
--------------------------------------

The problem is that the person who asked the question really wanted to
know how probable it is, not how hard. There’s a big difference.

A personal anecdote
-------------------

Many years ago, in the early days of Palm PDAs I wrote an English
dictionary for Palm OS. For more than 2 years I made several thousands
dollars per months from it.

Was it hard? Not at all. It took me about 2 weeks to write the first
version and there was nothing especially difficult about it - there are
thousands of programmers that could have done it.

My website was simplistic, my marketing skills limited to uploading my
app to an app store-like website (PalmGear) which handled selling the
app.

Nothing I did was difficult. However, my success wasn’t very probable.

I wrote one of the first (if not the first) dictionaries. Things were
different in 2001. Today everyone and their mother jumps on building
iPhone or Android apps bandwagons but back then I had no competition
from known dictionary publishers (publishers are not risk taking, future
embracing organizations).

For a while I had the market to myself and that helped to establish my
program as one of the most popular programs for Palm OS. Eventually
competition arrived and it did have negative effect on my sales, but
they had a really hard time catching up with me.

Lesson number 1: timing matters.

Getting timing right is not hard or easy, it’s simply not likely that
you’ll get the timing right. If the right timing is obvious, it’ll be
obvious for many people and, paradoxically, means it’s too late. If it’s
not obvious, there’s a big probability that whatever you think the right
timing is, you’re wrong.

The right timing is only obvious in retrospect.

In my case, I didn’t write my dictionary because I thought it’s the
right time to do it if I wanted to make money. I was just excited about
new technology (Palm Pilots), wanted to write some program for it and a
dictionary seemed like a good choice.

Do it once vs. do it many times
-------------------------------

Another way to look at it is repeatability.

The easy success of my app wasn’t lost on me. If I could replicate that
success several times, I would get quite rich with little effort.

So I’ve made more apps for Palm OS. They were more complex than my
dictionary. They took longer to write, but still weren’t hard to write.

I assume that my marketing, sales and other business skills were at
least as good as before. And yet, the other apps were all failures.

My first success was easy but it wasn’t easily repeatable.

Many people who answered the Quora question did build successful
websites making \$1000 or more a month. Does that mean that their
experience is good enough to declare that achieving what they did is
easy?

No. Just like me, they all have only one or two successful products. If
it’s easy, then why don’t they re-invest their capital in making more
products? After all, if you have 100 products each making \$1000 per
month, you’ll make more than a million a year.

The answers are a good example of selection bias. Even if something has
1% probability of happening, if there are 100 people who tried, 1 of
them will succeed. Given the popularity of Quora, it’s not hard to find
lots of people who tried something with low probability of success and
did it successfully. When they see someone asking if doing it was hard,
they jump in saying that it wasn’t.

They are truthful and trying to be helpful and encouraging but we don’t
get the complete picture because we don’t hear from much bigger number
of people who tried and failed.

The successes might have been easy, but they were not likely.

Just ship it
------------

Making software (be it a web site, a mobile app, a desktop app) that
makes money is something with low probability of success. It’s not as
bad as you think: making money in any self-directed business (as opposed
to being employed) has low probability of success.

More importantly: you have the biggest influence on that probability.

The person who asked this question probably won’t be successful. The
answer is unknowable and knowing it would not make a difference.

You’ll succeed or you’ll fail but you’ll not ever know it until you’ve
tried. Spending any time calculating your chances actually decreases the
probability because it takes away time and energy from things that
matter.

The single most important thing when building money making software
product is this: ship it.

My success might have been accidental, but it wouldn’t have happen if I
didn’t write the code, the website, the documentation and made my
program available for people to buy.

If the product fails, either improve it or make another one. The more
times you try, the more likely you’re to succeed.

When you start getting sales, double down. The unassailable logic of
software business is that it’s easier to make a successful product even
more successful than to create another one that is just as successful.

Look at any software business. Even the biggest successes, like
Microsoft or Google, have only few extremely profitable products and
despite having the brightest developers, mountains of money,
cross-promotional opportunities, they struggle to create more money
making products.
