Id: 402
Title: WinAmp 3
Date: 2002-09-02T02:14:08-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
I've seen some people bitching about new [WinAmp
3](http://www.winamp.com/) but I like it. Free-form skins are awesome.
Check out
[Timepiece](http://www.winamp.com/skins/detail.jhtml;$sessionid$F43DZVR1C0D4A5YAAAARCZY?componentId=117974)
skin. I'll probably settle for something clean and functional in the end
but it's so much fun checking out all those crazy, beautifully designed
skins.

WinAmp might not look like much but in my opinion it teaches a few
important lesson in software developement and marketing.

**WinAmp is a platform.** WinAmp isn't just a music (and now video)
player, it's a
[platform](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Platforms.html). All
the user-contributed skins, visualization components help WinAmp fend
off competition, even from those who can include competing player in the
OS itself.

**WinAmp is not only useful, it's also desireable.** When designing
stuff, including software, the first step is to design something that is
useful and functional. But when your competition's stuff is as
functional as yours, you have to do better, you have to compete in
desirability. Apple is a good example: their iPod doesn't play mp3
better than other players but it does look cool and that allows Apple
charge for it more. WinAmp also does a lot of things that don't
contribute much to functionality but a lot to desirability: tasteful
splash screen with a reference to a recent boxoffice hit,
visualizations, skins, animated "about box".

**WinAmp is masterfully marketed.** Take a careful look at WinAmp
[website](http://www.winamp.com/). It has it's own, distinctive voice.
You won't find there cliched market speak ("our product is leading blah,
blah..."). Web site is well designed (it's both tasteful and
functional).

It has forums so that people can talk about their products.Â It has
plenty of documentation. While this exact style might not be appropriate
for every software company, [many](http://www.corel.com/)
[could](http://www.franz.com/) [learn](http://www.digitool.com/) a lot
from guys at WinAmp.

Watch and learn.
