Id: 416
Title: You won't make money blogging
Date: 2002-09-09T04:17:02-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
At least not *just* blogging. Or so [this
article](http://scalzi.com/w020906.htm) says. Here's another reason why
selling information (content), on-line or otherwise, won't be very
successful. If there is one thing that has to be present in a business
model it's scarcity. The one thing common to selling furniture, gold,
cookies, CDs, software, licensing patents etc., is the scarcity of the
thing you're selling. Gold is a great example. I can't think of
something less useful, less desirable and not even very pretty, than
gold. Yet it's ridiculously expensive. Gold's value is artificial, it's
a historical accident (gold was valuable because it was scarce in nature
and as such was a great substitute of money when money didn't
yet exist). We, as a society, perpetuate this historical accident. It
only works because we all play the game. Now, salt is different but also
demonstrates the crucial aspect of scarcity. Today I can get all the
salt I'll ever need to consume in my lifetime for less than \$100. You
might not know it, but there was a time (a long time ago) when salt was
terribly expensive because people didn't know how to produce it. It was
scarce. Or you might have heard that around the time Columbus lived it
was worth to make a very expensive expedition to get spices from other
continents. The same thing that you'll get at QFC for a few bucks.
Scarcity again.

So what is the problem in the business model that assumes that people
will pay for content, say for the ability to read blogs? The problem is
that there is no scarcity. There are too many blogs, too many
newspapers, too many sources of information, too much music etc. They're
all fighting for our attention but we just don't have the time to
consume them all, even those that are free. In fact, the problem we're
facing is the  opposite: we would be willing to pay for something that
would filter all the available information and present only the stuff
that we're interested in.

So why should you blog? Well, some people just like to blog. More
business-oriented people might treat it as a great advertisement medium.
[Joel](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/) and
[Dave](http://www.scripting.com/) are masters at monetizing their
blogging. They use blog to differentiate themselves from the faceless
competition. Treat blogs as a self-promotion medium. Show how smart you
are and build personal reputation. Treat it as an opportunity to create
weak ties and network with similarly-minded people. Inspire other people
with your blog and get inspired by them.
