Id: 334001
Title: Value your time
Tags: productivity
Date: 2010-10-24T16:40:38-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
A common question on the internet: I want to host a website. Which low
cost VPS should I use? [Linode](http://www.linode.com) ($20/month for
the cheapest plan)? [Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com/) (also
$20/moth for the cheapest plan)? Something else?

A helpful, albeit misguided, answer would weight various pros and cons
of many services, compare prices, do rigorous processor and I/O
benchmarks etc.

A much better answer is: stop wasting your time (and money) trying to
optimize inconsequential parts of your business.

Your time is worth a lot. For the purpose of this discussion let’s say
it’s $50/hour (a not so great salary of a good software developer).

VPS hosting is a mature, competitive business. You can reject all plans
that are too good to be true (e.g. unlimited bandwidth for $5/month)
because they are scams. That leaves a number of roughly equivalent
plans. Pick one and move on to more important things.

If a competitive plan costs $20/month, let’s be unrealistic and assume
you’ll be able to find an equivalent service that is 25% ($5) cheaper.
One hour spent trying to find such a plan would cost you 10 months of
savings on such a hypothetical service.

Too many of us are obsessed with getting the best possible sticker price
without considering the total cost, which includes additional time spent
researching the options.

If you’re Google or Amazon, running thousands of servers, squeezing the
best possible value out of each server is worth the time because a minor
saving gets multiplied. If you’re choosing a single, low priced
commodity among many similar options, you’ll be better of just picking
one with minimal amount of research (the good stuff comes at the top
anyway) than spending unbound amount of time comparing options in hopes
of finding the best possible value.
