Id: 1790
Title: Blogs should always provide "previous posts" button
Date: 2004-06-02T04:04:24-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
Browsing [Since 1968](http://since1968.com/) website is painful. Only
the main page has full posts. It doesn't provide monthly archives and
category archives only provide post summaries. I'm only bitching about
this because it's an interesting weblog and I would like to quickly read
all past entries but the site isn't designed for that.

Also, its RSS feed only provides post summaries. The "full body" vs.
"summary" battle will never be settled - different people have different
preferences. From my personal experience: I always unsubscribe from
feeds that don't provide full posts. It's not to make a point or force
my point of view on the world. I subscribe to more than a 100 blogs. The
only way I can keep up with that in a reasonable amount of time is via
highly tuned reading process in RSS aggregator of my choice (Feed
Demon). Feeds with summaries break my reading flow. I can rarely tell
from the summary if the post is interesting enough to read so I have to
switch to a browser. And even if I could tell, if a weblog has a large
percentage of interesting posts, I would have to switch to a browser
anyway.

Now to the real point of this article: all weblogs should provide
"previous N posts" and "next N posts" at the bottom of of the page. It
greately helps reading past posts on a blog that a person just found.

Unfortunately I'm guilty of not providing that. It's not available by
default in WordPress and I don't know WordPress well enough to implement
it myself. If it's possible at all (without extensive hacking), it would
probably take a form of some arguments to index.php.
