Id: 826
Title: Productivity tips
Tags: productivity
Date: 2004-06-12T07:36:57-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
[Life Hacks](http://craphound.com/lifehacks2.txt) is a summary of
approaches taken by uber-productive net personalities like jzw, GvR, Tim
Bray or ESR. It’s also [summarized
here](http://www.boingboing.net/2004/06/06/danny_obriens_life_h.html).

My summary: manage knowledge in simple, searchable, cross-platform
format. The format of choice seems to be plain text file and a tool of
choice is a text editor.

I tried that approach and it didn’t work for me. Storing everything in
one file didn’t work because I had too much data to store. Navigating
one, big text document was too unwieldy. Part of the blame falls on a
tool - despite trying many, I didn’t find really confortable text editor
for Windows.

Then I tried storing information in multiple files. I was hoping that by
dividing info into files I’ll be able to navigate it more easily. A
crucial thing in such a setup is a good support from a text editor for
managing a collection of files. While I found an editor that did support
that, the support wasn’t good. Simple operations like creating a new
file and adding it to a project were annoyingly hard to do. Some desired
capabilities, like searching through all files, were not available.

I can see how a really good editor optimized for such usage would solve
those problems, but I didn’t find one yet.

Then I tried wiki-like desktop apps like FlexWiki and WikiPad. While the
idea is right, the implementation, at least at present, is abominable.

The I tried highly polished product: Microsoft’s OneNet. While looking
nice it doesn’t use open format and is very wasteful when it comes to
using screen space. The main activity is writing and copy&paste of texts
and OneNet isn’t optimized for that.

I ended up using this blog as a note taking app.
