Id: 322001
Title: Beware spurious charges when buying from Parallels (Digital River)
Date: 2010-09-09T15:28:30-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
Today Parallels, Inc made Parallels 6 for Mac available for users of
earlier versions. They promise speed updates so I went in right away to
give them my \$50 for the upgrade to version 6.

During checkout I almost got fleeced out of \$7 for their scammy
“Extended Download Service”. If I didn’t notice and remove this extra
charge (which they add by default, without asking) I would have become a
victim of their dishonest practices. \$7 is a 14% price increase over
their \$50 upgrade price.

When I say “their” I really mean Digital River, which is what Parallels,
Inc uses for their store, but Parallels isn’t blameless here since they
know and clearly bless that scam. They may even benefit from it.

“Extended Download Service” (EDS) allows you to re-download the software
you buy for up to 2 years, as opposed to default 30 days.

I’ll skip over the fact that such service costs nothing to provide so
they overcharge for it like there’s no tomorrow.

In case of Parallels it’s a pure scam because what you buy is not a
download but an activation key. The download is unactivated version that
is available for free from Parallels website. The EDS has no value here
and yet Digital River sneakily charges you 7 iPhone applications for it.

Digital River has been running this scam for a long time, it’s not news.

I blame Parallels for not finding a honest partner for handling their
e-commerce or at least forcing Digital River to not scam their
customers.

Parallels: please fix it. Your reputation is on the line here.

Software developers: if you’re searching for e-commerce provider, don’t
give business to Digital River. There is competition out there. If you
need just one recommendation, try
[FastSpring](http://www.fastspring.com).
