Id: 324001
Title: Drobo and warranty extortion
Date: 2010-09-16T15:06:14-07:00
Format: Markdown
Deleted: yes
--------------
I just had a really bad experience with support from Data Robotics
(makers of Drobo).

My Drobo S died. It’s not the bad part - hardware fails, it’s still
under 1 year warranty, I’ll get the replacement.

The bad part is their shipping policies.

Understandably, I want to get access to my files as soon as possible. My
expectation was that they’ll ship me a replacement unit right away and
I’ll ship the defective unit back at my convenience.

Turns out my expectation of decent support would only be met if I
purchase \$99 DroboCare to get what they call Advanced Replacement.
Otherwise my only option is to first send the broken unit to them and
only after that they’re willing to send the replacement.

Drobo is trying to use a bad situation (their device, after all, failed)
to extort me to pay additional \$99 for a service that I don’t care for.
Getting my files back sooner is important to me but it doesn’t cost them
a bit more to switch the shipping order. It’s risk free in both cases
(they pre-authorize credit card for the price of the device in case I
won’t ship back the device that broke).

Customer rep couldn’t explain why I need to pay \$99 for a service that
doesn’t cost anything to provide. She doesn’t make the rules and every
customer is treated the same. That would be a fine policy if Data
Robotics treated customers well.

To anyone higher up the chain at Data Robotics that does make the rules:
your rules for shipping replacements of failed drobos suck.

You’ve turned someone who’s mildly annoyed by disruption and potentially
loosing all my files stored on the Drobo into a hater by not meeting
reasonable expectations and trying to milk me at every opportunity, even
the very inappropriate one.
