Id: 733
Title: Skype as an example of changing nature of social interactions
Tags: software
Date: 2003-11-14T11:31:26-08:00
Format: Markdown
--------------
I just installed [Skype](http://www.skype.com/) - it's a terrific
program and I was able to make free "phone calls" between USA and Europe
(DSL network connection on both sides) with good quality (the only
problem were ocasional, short periods of silence). It god me thinking
about changing norms of social interactions. Today I was "called" via
Skype by 4 people I don't know. Never in my life was I called on my
cell-phone by a stranger (with the exception of "wrong number" cases and
telemarketers). So it seems like calling strangers on a cell-phone is
not an accepted behaviour while calling stranger on Skype is. Very
similar technologies, a big difference in how they are used. I speculate
that people adapt IM type behaviour (where chatting up a stranger by
sending him a unsolicited IM message is ok) to Skype rather than phone
type behaviour.\

\
Ah, telemarketers. I wonder if they'll start using Skype as well. As of
right now there are 120 thousand people running Skype - quite a market
of tech-savvy (potential) customers. From the telemarketer point of view
the pros are: there are no laws forbidding unsolicited commercial calls,
calls are free. On the con side: it might be hard to figure out physical
location of the person you're calling (you probably wouldn't want try to
sell physical goods from US to a guy in Russia). Skype is still very
young so we'll have to wait and see.
