Id: 323
Title: On "The 22 Immutable Laws Of Marketing"
Tags: book
Date: 2002-06-16T19:04:21-07:00
Format: Markdown
--------------

[The 22 Immutable Laws Of Marketing](http://www.amazon.com/The-22-Immutable-Laws-Marketing/dp/0887306667)
stresses the importance of first mover advantage: if you're the
first to bring some product to market, you have almost unbeatable
advantage over competition.

Or looking at it from the other side: if you want to compete with
players already present in the market, you're doomed. The book authors
have lots of examples to support their claim about importance of first
mover advantage.

Not everyone agrees with that. For one, there are plenty of examples in
computer industry that show the exact opposite. First spread-sheet is
not the most popular spread-sheet, neither is first word processor,
first internet search engine, first presentation package, first GUI
operating system, first PDA etc. Alan Cooper in his book "The inmates
are running the asylum" destroys this claim by saying that it doesn't
matter if your software is first to market if it sucks and you're still
extremely vulnerable to competition that will produce a better software.

Those are opposing views, which one is right?

The answer I found so farÂ the most plausible is buried inside the book
"Linked - the new science of networks". A network is just a set of nodes
connected with links. Web sites obviously form a network - a node is a
web page and links are, well, links between them. Products, companies
and customers also form a network. Products and customers are nodes,
while links represent the fact that a given customer bought a given
product. So the success of the product is the number of links it has to
customers. One insight of the book is that networks are not static but
dynamic, constantly changing and growing. This maps well to real world:
we know that markets evolve, some products die, new products are
created, some products gain popularity, some loose. Another insight of
the book is that links in the network are not created randomly. Observe
how the network evolves from the very beginning. Let's start with one
node. When second node arrives, forcibly the only link it can form is
with the first node. When the third node arrives, it can form a link
with one of two nodes. Even if probability of choosing a node to link to
is the same for each node, we can see that nodes created first will get
more links, just because they are older and had more opportunites to
form links. So this support the first mover advantage.

But the probability is not the same. Imagine you have 10 friends, 9 of
them drink coke and 1 of them drinks pepsi. When you're going to try
soda, you're more likely to try coke because you were exposed to it more
often. This "rich-get-richer" effect further strengthens first mover
advantage.

So how could late comer ever win (i.e. create a lot of links)
in the network? It's because all nodes are not created equal. A web site
with interesting content is more attractive than an empty web page thus
it's more likely that people will link to it. People prefer to drink
pepsi over water even though the water has been here longer than we are
and pepsi is (relatively) new invention. Google took over AltaVista
because it's simply much better search engine. We can model this effect
by assigning different probabilities of forming links to a given node.
The important insight here is that this intrinsic quality of the node is
much more important than the other effects and that's why ultimately
first mover advantage is not such a big advantage. A product that is
twice as good as the product that is twice as popular will quickly
become more popular because with time it'll get more links.

Of course don't foolishly disregard first mover advantage because even
in this more elaborate model, if you have a product only marginally
better than a competition and the competition has a majority of the
market, you'll never catch up with them. You can beat first mover
advantage but only with a vastly superior product.
